Paper: Pandata -- The Scalable Open-Source Analysis Stack (#823)
scipy-conference/scipy_proceedings: papers/james_bednar/james_bednar.tex

  \item\textbf{Efficient:} Run at machine-code speeds using vectorized data or JIT compilation
  \item\textbf{Scalable:} Run on anything from a single-core laptop to a thousand-node cluster
  \item\textbf{Cloud friendly:} Fully usable for local or remote compute using data on any file storage system
  \item\textbf{Multi-architecture:} Run on your desktop and on Mac/Windows/Linux CPUs and GPUs
  \item\textbf{Scriptable:} Fully support batch mode for parameter searches and unattended operation
  \item\textbf{Compositional:} Select which tools you need and put them together to solve your problem
  \item\textbf{Visualizable:} Support rendering even the largest datasets without conversion or approximation
  \item\textbf{Interactive:} Support fully interactive exploration, not just rendering static images or text files
  \item\textbf{Shareable:} Deployable as web apps for use by anyone anywhere
  \item\textbf{OSS:} Free, open, and ready for research or commercial use, without restrictive licensing
\end{itemize}

\begin{figure*}[t]
    \noindent\makebox[\textwidth][c]{\includegraphics[width=\textwidth]{sosa.png}}

>     \caption{SOSA: The Scalable Open-Source Analysis Stack\label{sosa}. Many data-processing problems can be solved by choosing one or more items from each of these categories (described later in the text). The tools shaded in gray are not part of SOSA itself but are used together with SOSA to make a complete stack suitable for a particular research domain.}

Reviewer: I felt the title was a little too long. How about the move "Many data-processing problems..." to the footnotes?

\end{figure*}
%%
Figure \ref{sosa} illustrates the SOSA stack, which includes the Parquet and Zarr file formats along with the fsspec, Kerchunk, Pandas, Xarray, RAPIDS, Dask, Numba, hvPlot, Panel, and Jupyter libraries. The tools are grouped into categories that will be described fully in later sections. We argue that this collection of tools is a meaningful base for general-purpose scientific computation across research areas and scientific domains. We will first look at the features that governed the selection of these particular libraries and that in many cases drive development priorities in the library itself. We will then describe the specific libraries involved and how they can be put together by users to solve computing tasks and how tool authors can build on them to support scientific computing in their own discipline.

\subsection{Design considerations}

Library authors have to choose between different designs and alternative technologies when deciding which features are implemented and how they are built.  Here we will unpack each of the above considerations driving the SOSA collection of libraries and examine how these libraries implement those principles.

> \subsubsection{Domain independent} SOSA tools are all designed to be applied across scientific domains, without making design choices that constrain them to a narrow subfield or topic. At first it may seem that having all your tools be written specifically for your particular research area would be ideal, but we argue that it is neither desirable nor feasible to draw strict boundaries between active scientific research areas. Should you have to switch to an entirely different stack whenever you do collaborative work? Or if you want to do something novel, differing slightly from assumptions previously made in your research area? A deep, difficult-to-change stack that encodes a fixed and unnecessarily brittle model of your domain will make scientific progress difficult to achieve. Of course, not every aspect of research crosses multiple domains or challenges core assumptions, but using SOSA tools ensures that doing so will come at relatively little cost, because the same tools are valid across a very wide range of fields. SOSA tools can also draw from expertise and funding across all of science and analysis, rather than from a single narrow area.

Reviewer: We suggest aligning the layout :)
```suggestion
\subsubsection{Domain independent}
SOSA tools are all designed to be applied across scientific domains, without making design choices that constrain them to a narrow subfield or topic. At first it may seem that having all your tools be written specifically for your particular research area would be ideal, but we argue that it is neither desirable nor feasible to draw strict boundaries between active scientific research areas. Should you have to switch to an entirely different stack whenever you do collaborative work? Or if you want to do something novel, differing slightly from assumptions previously made in your research area? A deep, difficult-to-change stack that encodes a fixed and unnecessarily brittle model of your domain will make scientific progress difficult to achieve. Of course, not every aspect of research crosses multiple domains or challenges core assumptions, but using SOSA tools ensures that doing so will come at relatively little cost, because the same tools are valid across a very wide range of fields. SOSA tools can also draw from expertise and funding across all of science and analysis, rather than from a single narrow area.
```

> \subsubsection{Efficient} Because Python itself is a relatively slow, interpreted language, native Python code is often suitable only for relatively small problems, limiting the audience for any tool built purely in Python with Python dependencies. To make efficient use of the computational resources available, SOSA libraries either wrap fast code written in compiled languages like FORTRAN and C, or they use the Numba Python JIT compiler to compile Python syntax into machine code that runs as fast as compiled C or Rust or FORTRAN. Custom domain-specific code for SOSA can easily use Numba as well, so that the overall workflow and pipeline is not limited by the speed of Python.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
\subsubsection{Efficient}
Because Python itself is a relatively slow, interpreted language, native Python code is often suitable only for relatively small problems, limiting the audience for any tool built purely in Python with Python dependencies. To make efficient use of the computational resources available, SOSA libraries either wrap fast code written in compiled languages like FORTRAN and C, or they use the Numba Python JIT compiler to compile Python syntax into machine code that runs as fast as compiled C or Rust or FORTRAN. Custom domain-specific code for SOSA can easily use Numba as well, so that the overall workflow and pipeline is not limited by the speed of Python.
```

> \subsubsection{Efficient} Because Python itself is a relatively slow, interpreted language, native Python code is often suitable only for relatively small problems, limiting the audience for any tool built purely in Python with Python dependencies. To make efficient use of the computational resources available, SOSA libraries either wrap fast code written in compiled languages like FORTRAN and C, or they use the Numba Python JIT compiler to compile Python syntax into machine code that runs as fast as compiled C or Rust or FORTRAN. Custom domain-specific code for SOSA can easily use Numba as well, so that the overall workflow and pipeline is not limited by the speed of Python.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
\subsubsection{Efficient} Because Python itself is a relatively slow, interpreted language, native Python code is often suitable only for relatively small problems, limiting the audience for any tool built purely in Python with Python dependencies. To make efficient use of the computational resources available, SOSA libraries either wrap fast code written in compiled languages like FORTRAN and C, or they use the Numba Python JIT compiler to compile Python syntax into machine code that runs as fast as compiled C or Rust or FORTRAN. Custom domain-specific code for SOSA can easily use Numba as well, so that the overall workflow and pipeline are not limited by the speed of Python.
```

> \subsubsection{Scalable} Even compiled code is not sufficient to address the largest problems, which require more memory than is available on a single machine, or require long computation that is feasible only when split across many processors working simultaneously. To cover all these cases, SOSA tools support distributed computation using Dask on hundreds or thousands of processors, while also fully supporting a single laptop or workstation. That way there is no need to switch to a different stack when you hit a problem larger than your machine, or conversely when you want to work on small problems that do not need extensive infrastructure. Supporting distributed computation efficiently requires tooling support at every level, starting with chunked binary file formats like Parquet and Zarr that let each processor access data independently, and culminating in visualization tools like Datashader that can render plots in separate chunks on each processor and combine them for the final display.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
\subsubsection{Scalable}
Even compiled code is not sufficient to address the largest problems, which require more memory than is available on a single machine, or require long computation that is feasible only when split across many processors working simultaneously. To cover all these cases, SOSA tools support distributed computation using Dask on hundreds or thousands of processors, while also fully supporting a single laptop or workstation. That way there is no need to switch to a different stack when you hit a problem larger than your machine, or conversely when you want to work on small problems that do not need extensive infrastructure. Supporting distributed computation efficiently requires tooling support at every level, starting with chunked binary file formats like Parquet and Zarr that let each processor access data independently, and culminating in visualization tools like Datashader that can render plots in separate chunks on each processor and combine them for the final display.
```

\subsubsection{Cloud friendly}

> The enormous datasets now available in many research areas that are hosted in a remote data center can be prohibitively expensive (in time and money) to download locally. If you only need a small part of the data, SOSA tools support efficient access to the relevant chunks of each remote file without having to download it all first, using fsspec to provide uniform filesystem-like access for data on local disk, cloud storage, web servers, and many other locations. If the total number of chunks that you need to access is still too high to download locally, SOSA tools also support remote computation, with the processing done on a remote cloud-computing server with a high-bandwidth connection to the data server, while providing a user interface on your local machine. A typical cloud-computing configuration for SOSA would be to have a remote JupyterHub system with Dask installed running on the cloud server close to the data. Users then contact the remote system from their local browser, initating a remote session for computation and data access but with interactivity on the local machine using web-based controls and visuals. Using Datashader on the remote system provides server-side rendering so that only a rendered image of the data ever need be transferred across low-bandwidth connections, providing visualization without having to transfer large datasets.

Reviewer: initating -> initiating
```suggestion
The enormous datasets now available in many research areas that are hosted in a remote data center can be prohibitively expensive (in time and money) to download locally. If you only need a small part of the data, SOSA tools support efficient access to the relevant chunks of each remote file without having to download it all first, using fsspec to provide uniform filesystem-like access for data on local disk, cloud storage, web servers, and many other locations. If the total number of chunks that you need to access is still too high to download locally, SOSA tools also support remote computation, with the processing done on a remote cloud-computing server with a high-bandwidth connection to the data server, while providing a user interface on your local machine. A typical cloud-computing configuration for SOSA would be to have a remote JupyterHub system with Dask installed running on the cloud server close to the data. Users then contact the remote system from their local browser, initiating a remote session for computation and data access but with interactivity on the local machine using web-based controls and visuals. Using Datashader on the remote system provides server-side rendering so that only a rendered image of the data ever need be transferred across low-bandwidth connections, providing visualization without having to transfer large datasets.
```

\subsubsection{Multi-architecture}

> Because researchers typically use Windows or Mac systems locally, while cloud servers typically run Linux, research code needs to be independent of the operating system for it to be equally well supported on local and remote systems. A software stack tied to a particular OS not only shuts out users who are not on that OS, it often implicitly favors either cloud or local usage for that stack, further reducing the community size and range of problems that can be addressed by a particular stack. SOSA tools are all either fully OS independent or they support Linux (Intel or ARM), Mac (Intel or M1/M2), and Windows. Similarly, some problems can be addressed orders of magnitude faster on a general-purpose graphics processing unit (GPU) than on a conventional CPU, yet many researchers do not have access to GPUs or are working on problems unsuited for them, making it essential that a general-purpose software stack support both GPU and CPU usage as appropriate. Many SOSA tools provide support for GPUs where appropriate.

Reviewer: We can remove "they"
```suggestion
Because researchers typically use Windows or Mac systems locally, while cloud servers typically run Linux, research code needs to be independent of the operating system for it to be equally well supported on local and remote systems. A software stack tied to a particular OS not only shuts out users who are not on that OS, it often implicitly favors either cloud or local usage for that stack, further reducing the community size and range of problems that can be addressed by a particular stack. SOSA tools are all either fully OS independent or support Linux (Intel or ARM), Mac (Intel or M1/M2), and Windows. Similarly, some problems can be addressed orders of magnitude faster on a general-purpose graphics processing unit (GPU) than on a conventional CPU, yet many researchers do not have access to GPUs or are working on problems unsuited for them, making it essential that a general-purpose software stack support both GPU and CPU usage as appropriate. Many SOSA tools provide support for GPUs where appropriate.
```

\subsubsection{Visualizable}

> For computing tasks that complete in the background without any visual output, it is easy to ensure that they are scriptable and cloud friendly. However, doing good science requires understanding each of the processing steps in complete detail, and if there are any unobservable black boxes in your workflows, that is where bugs will hide. To make sure that the work is being done correctly, it is crucial to be able to represent each of the computing steps involved in a way that a human can easily grasp what is happening, with a minimum of extra effort that discourages exploration. Often, a remote computing job will export data that is then subsampled and downloaded locally for analysis, but any step that adds friction and covers up the raw data makes it more likely that important issues and insights will be missed. Accordingly, the HoloViz tools included in the SOSA stack are designed to make the full set of data available at any point in the computation, by supporting efficient interactive visualization of even distributed or GPU-based data of any size using Datashader and hvPlot, assembled from separately computed chunks for display on any device.

Reviewer: complete -> are complete
```suggestion
For computing tasks that are complete in the background without any visual output, it is easy to ensure that they are scriptable and cloud friendly. However, doing good science requires understanding each of the processing steps in complete detail, and if there are any unobservable black boxes in your workflows, that is where bugs will hide. To make sure that the work is being done correctly, it is crucial to be able to represent each of the computing steps involved in a way that a human can easily grasp what is happening, with a minimum of extra effort that discourages exploration. Often, a remote computing job will export data that is then subsampled and downloaded locally for analysis, but any step that adds friction and covers up the raw data makes it more likely that important issues and insights will be missed. Accordingly, the HoloViz tools included in the SOSA stack are designed to make the full set of data available at any point in the computation, by supporting efficient interactive visualization of even distributed or GPU-based data of any size using Datashader and hvPlot, assembled from separately computed chunks for display on any device.
```

Author: ```suggestion
For computing tasks that operate in the background without any visual output, it is easy to ensure that they are scriptable and cloud friendly. However, doing good science requires understanding each of the processing steps in complete detail, and if there are any unobservable black boxes in your workflows, that is where bugs will hide. To make sure that the work is being done correctly, it is crucial to be able to represent each of the computing steps involved in a way that a human can easily grasp what is happening, with a minimum of extra effort that discourages exploration. Often, a remote computing job will export data that is then subsampled and downloaded locally for analysis, but any step that adds friction and covers up the raw data makes it more likely that important issues and insights will be missed. Accordingly, the HoloViz tools included in the SOSA stack are designed to make the full set of data available at any point in the computation, by supporting efficient interactive visualization of even distributed or GPU-based data of any size using Datashader and hvPlot, assembled from separately computed chunks for display on any device.
```

%%
\begin{figure*}[h]
    \noindent\makebox[\textwidth][c]{\includegraphics[width=\textwidth]{sosa-geoscience.png}}
    \caption{SOSA stack applied to a geoscience problem\label{sosa-geoscience}}
\end{figure*}
%%
\subsubsection{Visualization}

Whether or not any domain-specific processing has been done, the raw and processed data then need to be visualized so that humans can understand and validate them. Most Python visualization tools (see pyviz.org for a complete list) have limitations that prevent them from being suitable for the SOSA stack. Many of them are limited to relatively small amounts of data, lack support for the various data APIs that are needed, lack support for multidimensional arrays for the fields that need those, or are tied to a desktop OS or GUI. All SOSA tools support basic static-image visualization using Matplotlib, and most also support fully interactive Bokeh- or Plotly-based plotting via hvPlot. hvPlot supports the native `.plot' visualization calls provided by the data APIs, while adding support for efficient server-side distributed rendering using Datashader so that even the largest datasets can be visualized without subsampling or copying the data.

> \subsubsection{UI}

Reviewer 2: Suggestion: Title as User Interface, instead of UI, to be consistent with the previous subtitle’s format you are using.

> \subsubsection{UI}

Author: ```suggestion
\subsubsection{User Interface (UI)}
```

\subsubsection{Environments and reproducibility}

A final category of tools underlying all the rest shown in figure \ref{sosa} centers on how these libraries are packaged and put together into Python environments for solving any particular problem. Many different options are available for Python package and environment management, but SOSA tools are typically used with the conda package and environment manager, because it tracks binary dependencies between libraries, including the underlying C and FORTRAN code that is involved in the domain-specific libraries needed for any particular SOSA workflow. For any particular workflow, once the list of packages needed in the environment has been finalized, the anaconda-project (now being developed in a more general form as conda-project) allows the precise versions involved to be locked on every supported platform, achieving cross-platform reproducibility for a SOSA-based project (see

> https://www.anaconda.com/blog/8-levels-of-reproducibility for details).

Reviewer 2: Please, check this website (page not found).

Author: Maybe it was briefly offline? Testing https://www.anaconda.com/blog/8-levels-of-reproducibility works fine for me at the moment on different computers and with different people logged in.

Reviewer: It works fine for me too.

%  ray does have an explicit integration with dask; not clear how much it is in use

There are also full alternative stacks to consider, such as tools like Hadoop and Spark from the Apache Foundation. Most Apache tools rely on the Java Virtual Machine (JVM) that provides OS-independent computation but requires a heavyweight runtime compared to the SOSA tools, making it awkward to combine most Apache tools with SOSA tools. SOSA already offers flexible support for distributed computation without the JVM overhead, making ``big data'' tools like Hadoop and Spark unnecessary for SOSA applications. SOSA does rely on the low-level Parquet and Arrow Apache projects, which have non-JVM implementations that fit well into the SOSA stack.

> \subsubsection{Future work}

Reviewer 2: Please use the same subtitle format as the other subtitle (e.g. Introduction)

> \subsubsection{Future work}

Author: ```suggestion
\subsection{Future work}
```

Until then, SOSA is just a concept and an explanation for the work of hundreds of people working mostly independently but with key connections that make these independent projects come together into a coherent stack for performing scientific research.

Other relevant areas that need work include the development of domain-general tools for capturing metadata, conventions, consistent units, etc. per domain (like the CF conventions for climate science). Furthermore, improved tools for collaboration are needed, such as implementing parts of the JupyterHub roadmap (jupyterhub.readthedocs.io/en/stable/contributing/roadmap.html). Lastly, better documentation and workflow demonstrations of the SOSA stack are required to facilitate easier onboarding, provide comprehensive usage guidelines, and showcase the full potential of SOSA in solving diverse scientific problems.

> \subsubsection{Conclusion}

Reviewer 2: Please use the same subtitle format as the other subtitle (e.g. Introduction). This suggestion is based on the pdf version.

> \subsubsection{Conclusion}

Author: ```suggestion
\subsection{Conclusion}
```

% Up to 8 pages formatted
\subsection{Introduction \label{introduction}}

> Modern science, engineering, and analysis rely on computational tools for working with data, such as the foundational NumPy \cite{harris:nature20}, Pandas \cite{mckinney:scipy10}, and Matplotlib \cite{hunter:cse07} libraries for Python. Over the past few decades, many different research areas and communities have built their own ``stacks'', i.e. layered sets of software tools that are combined to solve problems in that particular research area. For instance, a Python geoscience stack might combine GDAL and Fiona for geoscience file-format access, Xarray (itself built on NumPy) for multidimensional array processing, cartopy (itself built on PROJ and NumPy) for handling earth coordinates, Matplotlib for plotting, and Jupyter for user interaction and code execution. A Python financial analysis stack might combine Pandas for file reading and columnar data manipulation, Matplotlib for plotting, TA-Lib for financial mathematics functions, and Jupyter for user interaction and code execution.

Reviewer 3: I would expect to see citations for numpy and jupyter in this paper.

Author: There was already a numpy citation, but I added one for jupyter (and many others) now.

\subsection{Design considerations}

Library authors have to choose between different designs and alternative technologies when deciding which features are implemented and how they are built.  Here we will unpack each of the above considerations driving the SOSA collection of libraries and examine how these libraries implement those principles.

\subsubsection{Domain independent}

> SOSA tools are all designed to be applied across scientific domains, without making design choices that constrain them to a narrow subfield or topic. At first it may seem that having all your tools be written specifically for your particular research area would be ideal, but we argue that it is neither desirable nor feasible to draw strict boundaries between active scientific research areas. Should you have to switch to an entirely different stack whenever you do collaborative work? Or if you want to do something novel, differing slightly from assumptions previously made in your research area? A deep, difficult-to-change stack that encodes a fixed and unnecessarily brittle model of your domain will make scientific progress difficult to achieve. Of course, not every aspect of research crosses multiple domains or challenges core assumptions, but using SOSA tools ensures that doing so will come at relatively little cost, because the same tools are valid across a very wide range of fields. SOSA tools can also draw from expertise and funding across all of science and analysis, rather than from a single narrow area.

Reviewer 3: I am 100% sympathetic to this point of view, but not all of these tools scale well. Pandas famously does not! This is the motivation for dask dataframes, no?

Author: Yes, that's tricky to be concrete about. A Dask dataframe is just a bag of Pandas dataframes, and so Pandas does scale well if used via Dask. It's not as if Dask has done away with the need for Pandas; it just makes it scalable. Similarly for Matplotlib -- Matplotlib itself isn't scalable, but when used with Datashader and a Dask dataframe, it can display server-side-rendered plots where the data never needs to leave the distributed set of servers.  I'll try to clarify that, but it's a pretty subtle distinction to convey.

\subsubsection{Efficient}

> Because Python itself is a relatively slow, interpreted language, native Python code is often suitable only for relatively small problems, limiting the audience for any tool built purely in Python with Python dependencies. To make efficient use of the computational resources available, SOSA libraries either wrap fast code written in compiled languages like FORTRAN and C, or they use the Numba Python JIT compiler to compile Python syntax into machine code that runs as fast as compiled C or Rust or FORTRAN. Custom domain-specific code for SOSA can easily use Numba as well, so that the overall workflow and pipeline is not limited by the speed of Python.

Author: ```suggestion
Because Python itself is a relatively slow, interpreted language, native Python code is often suitable only for relatively small problems, limiting the audience for any tool built purely in Python with Python dependencies. To make efficient use of the computational resources available, SOSA libraries either wrap fast code written in compiled languages like FORTRAN and C, or they use the Numba Python JIT compiler to compile Python syntax into machine code that runs as fast as compiled C or Rust or FORTRAN. Custom domain-specific code for SOSA can easily use Numba as well, so that the overall workflows and pipelines are not limited by the speed of Python.
```

> Because Python itself is a relatively slow, interpreted language, native Python code is often suitable only for relatively small problems, limiting the audience for any tool built purely in Python with Python dependencies. To make efficient use of the computational resources available, SOSA libraries either wrap fast code written in compiled languages like FORTRAN and C, or they use the Numba Python JIT compiler to compile Python syntax into machine code that runs as fast as compiled C or Rust or FORTRAN. Custom domain-specific code for SOSA can easily use Numba as well, so that the overall workflows and pipelines are not limited by the speed of Python.

Reviewer 3: Cython?

Author: People can use whatever libraries they like with SOSA, and Pandas itself uses cython, so I suppose I ought to mention it for completeness. Still, I wouldn't steer people writing new code to fit with these frameworks to cython; it doesn't offer any immediate additional benefit compared to what's in SOSA already and each new library mentioned just makes it more overwhelming for users to sort out...

Author: Mentions Cython now.

\subsubsection{Scalable}

> Even compiled code is not sufficient to address the largest problems, which require more memory than is available on a single machine, or require long computation that is feasible only when split across many processors working simultaneously. To cover all these cases, SOSA tools support distributed computation using Dask on hundreds or thousands of processors, while also fully supporting a single laptop or workstation. That way there is no need to switch to a different stack when you hit a problem larger than your machine, or conversely when you want to work on small problems that do not need extensive infrastructure. Supporting distributed computation efficiently requires tooling support at every level, starting with chunked binary file formats like Parquet and Zarr that let each processor access data independently, and culminating in visualization tools like Datashader that can render plots in separate chunks on each processor and combine them for the final display.

Reviewer 3: > To cover all these cases, SOSA tools support distributed computation using Dask on hundreds or thousands of processors, while also fully supporting a single laptop or workstation

SOSA stack? Or DASK stack?

Author: We did discuss naming the stack after Dask, but in the end decided that because Dask is always optional, it would be confusing to do so. The strength of SOSA is if you use these particular tools that support Dask but don't require it, it is easy to support fully scalable operation without your users having to switch anything besides the Data API library. So if someone is developing for small problems only, we don't want to force them to use Dask; they can happily use Pandas natively and everything just works; they'll just need to pass in a Dask dataframe later if they encounter a larger problem. So in the end we decided it wasn't the Dask stack, it was the Dask- _supporting_ stack, and the reason to support Dask is to allow scalability, hence the Scalable Open-source Analysis stack.  Lots of tradeoffs in any naming exercise, of course!

\subsubsection{Cloud friendly}

> The enormous datasets now available in many research areas that are hosted in a remote data center can be prohibitively expensive (in time and money) to download locally. If you only need a small part of the data, SOSA tools support efficient access to the relevant chunks of each remote file without having to download it all first, using fsspec to provide uniform filesystem-like access for data on local disk, cloud storage, web servers, and many other locations. If the total number of chunks that you need to access is still too high to download locally, SOSA tools also support remote computation, with the processing done on a remote cloud-computing server with a high-bandwidth connection to the data server, while providing a user interface on your local machine. A typical cloud-computing configuration for SOSA would be to have a remote JupyterHub system with Dask installed running on the cloud server close to the data. Users then contact the remote system from their local browser, initiating a remote session for computation and data access but with interactivity on the local machine using web-based controls and visuals. Using Datashader on the remote system provides server-side rendering so that only a rendered image of the data ever need be transferred across low-bandwidth connections, providing visualization without having to transfer large datasets.

Reviewer 3: To be clear -- NumPy and Pandas alone don't do this? Is this a dask-specific argument?

Author: I'll try to clarify; for a single-CPU problem Pandas+Datashader is perfectly cloud friendly in that data never needs to be transmitted over the wire, it's just not scalable.  Matplotlib is cloud friendly if rendering to a PNG or SVG on the remote server. Bokeh alone is not cloud friendly for large data running remotely because it requires all the data to be sent to the local client for display. HoloViews+Datashader+Bokeh is cloud friendly since the data never needs to be sent all the way to the local client.  So many combinations!  I've tried to focus on the principles here, of leaving data where it lies and processing it there; detailing all the combinations that do or do not work well would be infeasible here. I'll see what I can do!

Author: Clarified.

\subsubsection{Multi-architecture}

> Because researchers typically use Windows or Mac systems locally, while cloud servers typically run Linux, research code needs to be independent of the operating system for it to be equally well supported on local and remote systems. A software stack tied to a particular OS not only shuts out users who are not on that OS, it often implicitly favors either cloud or local usage for that stack, further reducing the community size and range of problems that can be addressed by a particular stack. SOSA tools are all either fully OS independent or support Linux (Intel or ARM), Mac (Intel or M1/M2), and Windows. Similarly, some problems can be addressed orders of magnitude faster on a general-purpose graphics processing unit (GPU) than on a conventional CPU, yet many researchers do not have access to GPUs or are working on problems unsuited for them, making it essential that a general-purpose software stack support both GPU and CPU usage as appropriate. Many SOSA tools provide support for GPUs where appropriate.

Reviewer 3: One day we will have the year of linux on the desktop, I swear

Author: This is the year.

\subsubsection{Environments and reproducibility}

A final category of tools underlying all the rest shown in figure \ref{sosa} centers on how these libraries are packaged and put together into Python environments for solving any particular problem. Many different options are available for Python package and environment management, but SOSA tools are typically used with the conda package and environment manager, because it tracks binary dependencies between libraries, including the underlying C and FORTRAN code that is involved in the domain-specific libraries needed for any particular SOSA workflow. For any particular workflow, once the list of packages needed in the environment has been finalized, the anaconda-project (now being developed in a more general form as conda-project) allows the precise versions involved to be locked on every supported platform, achieving cross-platform reproducibility for a SOSA-based project (see
https://www.anaconda.com/blog/8-levels-of-reproducibility for details).

\subsection{Examples}

> To get an understanding of how these tools fit together, there is a variety of example workflows based on SOSA tools available online. The website examples.holoviz.org includes a variety of research topics across domains, with SOSA tools featured prominently in most of them and particularly the Attractors, Census, Ship traffic, and Landsat examples. The holoviz.org site has a tutorial that brings in many of the SOSA packages to solve an example research problem. The Pangeo Project Gallery at pangeo.io and Project Pythia at projectpythia.org both include some very detailed examples in the specific area of climate science. Each SOSA package also has its own documentation and website illustrating what it can do, often in combination with other SOSA tools, such as the Dask examples at stories.dask.org.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
To understand how these tools fit together, there are a variety of example workflows based on SOSA tools available online. The website examples.holoviz.org includes a variety of research topics across domains, with SOSA tools featured prominently in most of them and particularly the Attractors, Census, Ship traffic, and Landsat examples. The holoviz.org site has a tutorial that brings in many of the SOSA packages to solve an example research problem. The Pangeo Project Gallery at pangeo.io and Project Pythia at projectpythia.org both include detailed examples in the specific area of climate science. Each SOSA package also has its own documentation and website illustrating what it can do, often in combination with other SOSA tools, such as the Dask examples at stories.dask.org.
```

Author: ```suggestion
To understand how these tools fit together, a variety of example workflows based on SOSA tools can be found online. The website examples.holoviz.org includes research topics in different domains, with SOSA tools featured prominently in most of them and particularly the Attractors, Census, Ship Traffic, and Landsat examples. The holoviz.org site has a tutorial that brings in many of the SOSA packages to solve an example research problem. The Pangeo Project Gallery at pangeo.io and Project Pythia at projectpythia.org both include detailed examples in the specific area of climate science. Each SOSA package also has its own documentation and website illustrating what it can do, often in combination with other SOSA tools, such as the Dask examples at stories.dask.org.
```

Many of the components of these stacks date back decades before Python became popular, capturing important functionality but inheriting technical complexity and limitations that may no longer apply. For instance, domain-specific visualization and user interface (UI) tools are often tied to a local desktop operating system and graphical user interface (GUI), limiting the stack to working with data and processing power available locally, and making it difficult to share work with colleagues at other sites or using other operating systems. Older tools are often either inherently single threaded, with no support for distributed computation, or specifically focused on supercomputing systems rather than flexibly supporting the diversity of computing platforms now available (such as GPUs and cloud computing). Software is of course infinitely malleable, and so any such limitations could be addressed \emph{in principle}, but in practice each domain-specific tool has a relatively narrow collection of users, potential contributors, and funding sources for that domain, limiting the scope of such development.

> Could there be a better way? Yes! Today's Python ecosystem includes general data-processing tools that address tasks that cross research areas, domains, and industries, with flexible tools for storing, reading, processing, plotting, analyzing, modeling, and exploring data of any kind. This paper introduces a collection of such tools called SOSA: the Scalable Open-Source Analysis Stack, with ``scalable'' emphasizing that these tools can support computation at any scale, and ``open-source'' to distinguish this stack from other groupings like the ``Modern Data Stack'' \cite{handy:dbtb20} that include closed-source commercial tools as key components.

Reviewer 4: Comment that "any scale" means something like "laptop size to PB datasets processed on thousands of cores"? Makes this sentence long, but I feel it would be useful. We go into this later, though.

Author: Your call on that one -- if you think later is too late and skimming readers won't see it, we can put that info right here too.

Reviewer 4: "(laptop to supercomputer/datacentre)" ?

SOSA tools are all designed to be applied across scientific domains, without making design choices that constrain them to a narrow subfield or topic. At first it may seem that having all your tools be written specifically for your particular research area would be ideal, but we argue that it is neither desirable nor feasible to draw strict boundaries between active scientific research areas. Should you have to switch to an entirely different stack whenever you do collaborative work? Or if you want to do something novel, differing slightly from assumptions previously made in your research area? A deep, difficult-to-change stack that encodes a fixed and unnecessarily brittle model of your domain will make scientific progress difficult to achieve. Of course, not every aspect of research crosses multiple domains or challenges core assumptions, but using SOSA tools ensures that doing so will come at relatively little cost, because the same tools are valid across a very wide range of fields. SOSA tools can also draw from expertise and funding across all of science and analysis, rather than from a single narrow area.

\subsubsection{Efficient}

> Because Python itself is a relatively slow, interpreted language, native Python code is often suitable only for relatively small problems, limiting the audience for any tool built purely in Python with Python dependencies. To make efficient use of the computational resources available, SOSA libraries either wrap fast code written in compiled languages like Fortran and C, or they use a Python compiler like Numba \cite{lam:llvm15} or Cython \cite{behnel:cse11} to compile Python syntax into machine code that runs as fast as compiled C or Rust or Fortran. Custom domain-specific code building on SOSA can easily use a compiler like Numba as well, so that the overall workflows and pipelines are not limited by the speed of Python.

Reviewer 4: It's only Fortran if referring to >=f90 :)

Author: I actually looked it up. :-) 
<img width="618" alt="image" src="https://github.com/scipy-conference/scipy_proceedings/assets/1695496/16ce6568-ff99-41d6-ad3b-4b0debc32625">

%%
\subsubsection{Visualization}

> Whether or not any domain-specific processing has been done, the raw and processed data then need to be visualized so that humans can understand and validate them. Most Python visualization tools (see \texttt{pyviz.org} for a complete list) have limitations that prevent them from being suitable for the SOSA stack. Many of them are limited to relatively small amounts of data, lack support for the various data APIs that are needed, lack support for multidimensional arrays for the fields that need those, or are tied to a desktop OS or GUI. All SOSA tools support basic static-image visualization using Matplotlib, and most also support fully interactive Bokeh- or Plotly-based plotting via hvPlot \cite{rudiger:hvplot}. hvPlot supports the native \texttt{.plot} visualization calls provided by the data APIs, while adding support for efficient server-side distributed rendering using Datashader so that even the largest datasets can be visualized without subsampling or copying the data.

Reviewer 4: You mean https://pyviz.org/tools.html ?

\subsubsection{Environments and reproducibility}

> A final category of tools underlying all the rest shown in figure \ref{sosa} centers on how these libraries are packaged and put together into Python environments for solving any particular problem. Many different options are available for Python package and environment management, but SOSA tools are typically used with the conda package and environment manager, because it tracks binary dependencies between libraries, including the underlying C and Fortran code that is involved in the domain-specific libraries needed for any particular SOSA workflow. For a specific workflow, once the list of packages needed in the environment has been finalized, the anaconda-project tool (now being developed in a more general form as conda-project) allows the precise versions involved to be locked on every supported platform, achieving cross-platform reproducibility for a SOSA-based project (see

Reviewer 4: citation here is for conda-project ? If not, a direct link would be nice.

\subsection{Alternatives to SOSA}

> The libraries in SOSA are of course not the only alternatives available in Python; each library individually has alternatives that have their own strengths and advantages. However, the alternative libraries have not (yet?) been integrated with SOSA tools, making it much more difficult to apply them to a SOSA-based project. For instance, Ray \cite{moritz:arxiv18} is an alternative approach to distributed computation that is not supported by these tools, and so if a project uses Ray to manage distributed computation, then they cannot easily select hvPlot for visualization without first converting the data structures into something hvPlot understands. Similarly, Vaex \cite{breddels:aaa18} and Polars \cite{ritche:polars} offer alternatives to the Pandas/Dask columnar dataframes supported in SOSA, and so projects based on those data APIs will not (yet!) easily be able to use SOSA tools for visualization and user interfaces. There are also now alternative tools for server-side rendering of large datasets that in SOSA are handled by Datashader, such as VegaFusion for Vega and Altair, but those are not fully integrated with the other SOSA libraries like Dask and Numba.

Reviewer 4: If you want to choose a different compute engine here, use Spark rather than Ray, because you can run dask workloads on ray, apparently quite well.

Reviewer 4: Correction: I see you poke spark specifically in the next paragraph. Maybe MPI or something else here?

Author: Hmm. Does running a Dask workload on Ray give any advantages?  Normally I try not to call out alternatives unless they meet a need not already covered. And I think the point still stands that if you pick up Ray and work with it, you won't be able to use hvPlot to view your distributed data structure.

Reviewer 4: > Does running a Dask workload on Ray give any advantages?

According to the authors of dask-on-ray, yes - but I don't know how well this holds up.

> you won't be able to use hvPlot to view your distributed data structure.

If think you totally would, it amounts to setting the default dask scheduler, and any dask workload will be farmed to it.

> Other relevant areas that need work include the development of domain-general tools for capturing metadata, conventions, consistent units, etc. per domain (like the CF conventions for climate science). Furthermore, improved tools for collaboration are needed, such as implementing parts of the JupyterHub roadmap (\texttt{jupyterhub.readthedocs.io/en/stable/ contributing/roadmap.html}). Lastly, better documentation and workflow demonstrations of the SOSA stack are required to facilitate easier onboarding, provide comprehensive usage guidelines, and showcase the full potential of SOSA in solving diverse scientific problems.

Reviewer 4: Extra space appeared in the jhub link

Author: That space gives a line break with no hyphen; the URL is too long to fit on one line. This is a case where putting it in the bibliography would make sense for formatting, it just seems like such a strange thing to be referencing as anything other than a hyperlink.
